---
title: "Covenant"
date: 2023-10-22
categories: [Essays, Sunday Sessions]
tags:
---

> *Now the Lord said to Abram, "Get out of your country, from your kindred and from your father's house, to a land I will show you. I will make you a great nation; I will bless you and make your name great; and you shall be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and curse those who curse you; and in you all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed."* (Genesis 12:1-3)

Today we begin a new chapter in our catechesis.
Hopefully by now you understand that being an Orthodox Christian isn't fundamentally about mentally agreeing to a list of beliefs, or following a set of rules, or even about being 'right'.
It is rather a way of being in communion with God and working to reconcile ourselves and the world around us into divine relationship in and through Jesus Christ.
If we keep this one thing in mind, we will 'stand aloof from stupid speculations and genealogies, and controversies and quarrels about the law, for they are unprofitable and pointless.' (Titus 3:9)

The way that the Bible describes this relationship is with the word 'covenant', which means something like a promise or a working agreement.
It's the same Greek word (διαθήκη) which is also translated 'testament', and the two halves of Bible itself are named after the old and new testaments, or covenants.
Although we refer to the Old Covenant in the singular, it actually comprises multiple, provisional covenants.
Some of these are between God and an individual such as Noah or Abraham, while the covenant established through Moses was with the entire nation of Israel.
These multiple covenants do not stop and start, but rather flow into each other and increase from individuals to families to nations.

The pattern that we see in the Old Testament is that people rarely remain faithful to the covenants that God creates for them. Psalm 77 (78) recounts the whole history:

> *They did not keep God's covenant,  
> And they did not desire to walk in His law;  
> And they forgot His good deeds  
> And His wonders He showed them  
> In the sight of their fathers,  
> The marvelous things He did  
> In the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.  
> He parted the sea and led them through;  
> The waters stood like a dam,  
> And He led them with a cloud by day,  
> And all night by the light of a fire.  
> He split the rock in the desert  
> And gave them water to drink as in a great deep;  
> And He brought out water from the rock,  
> And He brought it down like the waters of rivers.  
> And they still continued to sin against Him;  
> They rebelled against the Most High in a place without water,  
> And they tested God in their hearts  
> ...  
> In all these things they still sinned  
> And did not believe in His wonders;  
> ...  
> But they deceived Him with their mouth  
> And lied to Him with their tongue,  
> For their heart was not right with Him,  
> Neither were they faithful to His covenant.*  

And yet God continues to be faithful to us. The psalm continues:

> *But He is merciful  
> And will atone for their sins, and not destroy them;  
> And He will multiply them, and turn away His anger;  
> And He will not kindle all His wrath.  
> ...  
> He chose David for His servant  
> And took him from the sheepfolds;  
> He took him from behind sheep that gave birth  
> To shepherd Jacob His people  
> And Israel His inheritance;  
> And he shepherded them in the integrity of his heart  
> And guided them with the skillfulness of his hands.*  

Israel's repeated unfaithfulness is not meant to make us despair, but to point towards a new and final covenant, mediated by God himself rather than imperfect priests and animal sacrifice (Hebrews 5:1-10). Jeremiah says:

> *'Behold, days are coming,' says the Lord, 'when I shall make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not according to the covenant I made with their fathers in the day I took hold of their hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; for they did not abide in My covenant, and I disregarded them,' says the Lord. 'For this is the covenant I will make with the house of Israel after those days,' says the Lord. 'I will surely put My laws into their mind and write them on their hearts. I will be as God to them, and they shall be as My people. Each shall not teach his neighbor and each his brother, saying, "Know the Lord," for all shall know Me, from the least of them to the greatest of them. For I will be merciful to their wrongdoings, and I will no longer remember their sins.'* (Jeremiah 38 (31):31-34)

Although we have both feet firmly planted in this new covenant through Jesus Christ, it is helpful to look back at this history of salvation since it is the way that God chose to teach and prepare the world for Christ. Here are three key aspects of the covenants that we find in the Old Testament, and which have their fulfilment in the Kingdom of heaven today.

## God's Choosing

> *For you are a holy people to the Lord your God; the Lord your God chose you to be a people for Himself, special above all the nations on the face of the earth. The Lord did not prefer nor choose you because you were more in number than all the nations, for you are the least of all the nations; but because the Lord loves you, and because He would keep the oath He swore to your fathers, the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. Therefore know, the Lord your God, this God, is a faithful God, who keeps covenant and mercy for a thousand generations with those who love Him and keep His commandments* (Deuteronomy 7:6-9)
<p></p>
> *You did not choose me but I chose you, and I appointed you to go and bear fruit.* (John 15:16)

Today we like to think that everyone has equal access to God.
After all, 'there is no partiality with God', right? (Romans 2:11)
This has unfortunately led to the idea that salvation is a kind of timeless, decontextualised 'system' that anyone can follow.
This is neiter Scriptural, nor Orthodox.

Whenever God chooses to act in the world, he begins by choosing a specific person or group of people, or even an inanimate object such as a staff or a bush.
The vast majority of the Bible contains not timeless, eternal truths, but stories which have particular characters, times, and places.
This is not an accident, but an important lesson: in order to find God in our own life we need to look in the specific and the mundane.
We are not called to love humanity, but our neighbour.
And in the Incarnation, Christ did not reveal Himself in a manifesto, but in flesh and blood as an individual person.

God's covenants, therefore, start with His choice to connect with a particular person or people.
We do not practice a decentralised faith.
To become Orthodox, we must reject the modern notion that we approach God as autonomous, independent individuals who have decided that faith in God seems agreeable to us.
It is Christ's faithfulness and obediance to the Father that establishes an eternal covenant with humanity.
It is only through the Apostolic teaching and community (the Church) that we can be truly 'in Christ', and it is only by being in Christ that we have access to God.

The major covenants in the Old Testament are with Abraham (described in Genesis) and Moses (described largely in Exodus and Deuteronomy).
Both of these covenants applied particularly to the descendants of Joseph, Abraham's grandson, and the community that left Egypt, who were metaphorically if not literally 'Abraham's seed'.
St Paul would later expand on Abraham's covenant to say that those who share in Christ's faith are his spiritual children, and therefore heirs of the promise of the Abrahamic covenant which was fulfilled in Christ.

> *Just as Abraham 'believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness,' so understand that those who are 'of faith' are Abraham's children. Scripture foresaw that God justifies the Gentiles by faith and announced the Gospel in advance to Abraham: 'In you all the nations will be blessed.' Therefore those 'of faith' are blessed with faithful Abraham.* (Galatians 3:6-9)

## Proper Sacrifice

In ancient times, sacrifice was explicit and ubiquitous.
Temples were bloody places, full of the smell of burning carcasses.
We might be tempted to think that we have progressed beyond this primitive belief, and we find it easy to agree with the Psalmist when he quotes God as saying, 'If I were hungry, I would not tell you; For the world is Mine, and all its fullness. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, Or drink the blood of goats?' (Psalm 49 (50):12-13)
But as Jonathan Pageau rightly points out, even human sacrifice is still very much a part of our world in sublimated forms.[^human-sacrifice]
The very next Psalm, one of the most treasured in the collection, seems to contradict itself by saying 'You will not be pleased with whole burnt offerings' (v.18), but then concluding 'Do good, O Lord, in Your good pleasure to Zion, ... Then You will be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, With offerings and whole burnt offerings; Then shall they offer young bulls on Your altar.' (v.20-21)

We can conclude, then, that while God does not require sacrifice, covenants do.
This is in fact true of all relationships, of which divine covenants are a particular kind.
Even a casual friendship requires a willingness to go out of your way to help the other person when it is needed.
The idea that sacrifice is not part of the modern world is simply false.
But we can choose to make a proper sacrifice, and to offer it to God rather than an idol.

The Old Testament is full of examples of proper and improper sacrifices, beginning with the contrast between Cain and Abel.
Abraham's covenant is confirmed when he agrees to offer his son Isaac as a sacrifice (Genesis 22:1-19), and a large portion of the Pentateuch is dedicated to instructions for offering temple sacrifices.
Christ's eternal self-offering removes the need for further sacrifice of this kind, but it in no way removes the importance of sacrifice itself. On the contrary, it is only by dying with Christ in Baptism that we have eternal life in His resurrection.
'If we have died with him we shall also live with him.' (2 Timothy 2:11)
Additionally, we learned from Fr Tom Hopko last week that the sacrament of Divine Liturgy is predicated on our continuing self-sacrifice.

## Circumcision

> *This is the covenant you shall keep, between Me and you and your seed after you throughout their generations: Every male child among you shall be circumcised; and you shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin. It shall be a sign of the covenant between Me and you.* (Genesis 17:10-11)

Circumcision is an awkward topic for obvious reasons, and therefore it is tempting to write it off as a cultural custom that isn't important for Christians.
'For in Christ Jesus nothing is achieved by circumcision or by uncircumcision, but only by faith working through love.' (Galatians 5:6)
Nevertheless, 'Every Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching', (2 Timothy 3:16) and it would be unwise to ignore something which was obviously a very important part of the Old Covenant!
What then is the meaning behind the practise?

In literal terms, circumcision is a violent cutting off of a 'covering' which is left behind to die. It is also a mark of belonging to the covenant people of God.
St Paul gives us the spiritual meaning of this in Christ:

> *In him you have been circumcised, with a circumcision not performed by human hand, through the casting off of the sinful body of flesh in the circumcision of Christ. You have been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith by the working of God who raised him from the dead. You, who were dead in the transgressions and uncircumcision of your flesh, he made alive with him by forgiving us every transgression.* (Colossians 2:11-13)

A point of clarification: the 'circumcision of Christ' here does not mean His literal circumcision, but rather that 'in his suffering and death, Christ was cut off from among the people.'[^cut-off]
As St Paul explains, 'It is written, "Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree," and Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse on our behalf'. (Galatians 3:13)
In Baptism we 'cut off' our sin, a sacramental reality that we try to live up to in daily life as we 'lay aside every burden and the sin which so easily entangles us' (Hebrews 12:1)
And we ourselves are often cut off from the world when we follow Christ. 'Through [the cross] the world has been crucified to me and I to the world' (Galatians 6:14)

Circumcision, then, is an extremely powerful metaphor.
Actually it sums up the other two aspects of covenant that we have looked at, namely, being a chosen people and offering sacrifice.
The marking of the genitals is a sign that the covenant extends to the man's children, to 'Abraham and his offspring, through the ages.' (Luke 1:55)
And it is a foreshadowing of Christ's crucifixion, which is the ultimate and final sacrifice to God.

## The History of Salvation

I hope I have convinced you that the Old Covenant still has a lot to teach us as Christians!
You should therefore try to become more familiar with the it, even if it's only by reading the stories in a Children's Bible.
Next time, we'll begin to focus on some of the Patriarchs, who serve as our guideposts to Christ.

[^human-sacrifice]: Jonathan Pageau, 'Why Humans Sacrifice'. <https://youtu.be/njrlriUbSIc?si=p1AWVLOyJ4Kl064a>
[^cut-off]: Fr. Stephen De Young, 'On Circumcision and Baptism'. <https://blogs.ancientfaith.com/wholecounsel/2019/11/21/on-circumcision-and-baptism/>
