---
title: "Prophecy, Then and Now"
date: 2023-11-19
categories: [Essays, Sunday Sessions]
tags:
---

## Twin Pillars: The Law and the Prophets

> *'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the first and great commandment, and the second is like it: you shall love your neighbour as yourself. The entire law and the prophets hang upon these two commandments.'* (Matthew 22:37-40)
<p></p>
> *'Do not think that I have come to overthrow the law or the prophets. I have not come to overthrow but to fulfil* (Matthew 5:17)
<p></p>
> *And beginning with Moses and all the prophets he explained to them from the whole of Scripture things about himself.* (Luke 24:27)
<p></p>
> *...now, independently of the law, the righteousness of God has been revealed as the law and the prophets bear witness.* (Romans 3:21)

The passages above are only a sample of the many times where the phrase 'the Law and the Prophets' is used in the New Testament.
Whereas today we tend to see the Old Testament as one thing, the Jews of the time made a clear distinction between the books of Moses called Torah&mdash;Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy&mdash;and the rest of the sacred writings.
The canon of these prophetic writings, unlike the Torah, was somewhat nebulous, and the amount of authority they commanded was ill defined.

At one extreme, the Saducees accepted only the Torah[^saducee], favouring a kind of 'minimal Jewishness', one that was least likely to collide with Roman authority.
But Jesus, and therefore the Church, embraced the Prophetic writings, oral teachings, and customary practices which developed during the centuries preceding Christ.
As the commonality of the phrase 'law and prophets' shows, these writings and practices were, and are, very important to our understanding.
Importantly, the prophetic writings point towards the Messiah and the messianic age.
And the emphasis on personal asceticism (fasting, for example) as well as the specifics of the Passover commemoration all come, not from the Law of Moses, but the dynamic, prophetic tradition of the Jewish people in the second-temple period.

## New Testament Prophecy

> *...this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel, "In the last days, says God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions and your old men shall dream dreams. Yes, in those days I will pour out my Spirit upon my male and female servants also, and they shall prophesy."* (Acts 2:16-19)
<p></p>
> *In those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch, and one of them named Agabus stood up and indicated through the Spirit that there was going to be a great famine throughout the whole world, which happened in the time of Claudius Caesar.* (Acts 11:27-28)
<p></p>
> *There are various gifts but the same Spirit...To each person the revelation of the Spirit is given as is appropriate. And so to one person a word of wisdom is given through the Spirit, and to another a word of knowledge from the same Spirit, to another faith by the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the ability to perform miracles is given, and to another prophecy, to another the discernment of spirits, to someone else a diversity of languages, and to another the interpretation of languages. In all of these the one and the same Spirit is at work, apportioning to each individually as he decides.* (1 Corintians 12:4,7-11)

What of prophecy in the New Testament Church?
On the one hand, St Peter quotes the prophet Joel to demonstrate that prophecy is a symbol of the arrival of the messianic age.
But on the other, St Paul gives a more balanced view of prophecy as only one of many gifts to be used wisely and with discretion&mdash;and also one that we will someday grow out of, spiritually speaking.
In the New Testament writings there is only one person recorded in Acts as foretelling specific events in the future, a man named Agabus. This suggests that this particular use of prophecy is an exception, rather than the norm.
From the historical record we can see that, while the early Christians were known for their bravery and evangelism, they weren't known for predicting the future.

To make sense of these disparate facts, we should go a little deeper into what prophecy actually _is_. From there we will have eyes to see and ears to hear our own profoundly and consistently prophetic Orthodox Tradition.

## So, What is it then?

To define prophecy well, we first have to rid ourselves of our modern reasons for wanting to know about it.
For us modern materialists (and you are almost certainly still a materialist at some level), prophecies are, like miracles, 'supernatural' phenomena that we can use to prove (or disprove) that the supernatural, as such, exists.
In this mindset we are always on the lookout for, and won't be satisfied until we find, something that can't be explained by natural means, and we will most likely be disappointed.
God wants to give us Truth, but we are looking for magic tricks.
'Seek, and you will find'&mdash; but only if we are seeking the right thing in the first place.

Neither does prophecy exist to give us a superpower, like clairvoyance or telepathy.
God's grace does sometimes manifest in these ways among the saints.
But for anyone who does not have true humility, this kind of thing would be spiritually deadly.
Therefore we should never ask or go looking for prophetic gifts as individuals.

Nevertheless, God has indeed poured out his Spirit on the Church, and its sons and daughters prophecy.
How is this so?
To recognise the prophetic voice of Orthodoxy, we need to look first to the Church itself, and her Apostolic, Spirit-filled Tradition.
Those who make up the Church are a living voice, speaking a prophetic word into the world around us.
There are two prophetic aspects of the Church in particular: these can be called _liturgy_ and _witness_.

### Liturgy

It is a mistake to think of the Divine Liturgy as rote or mindless repetition.
In fact, it is more like a sunrise: despite its predictable repetition, one can't help feeling that each new morning is a unique and special event, and this is in fact the truth.
Likewise when we listen to a piece of classical music, the knowledge that the final cadence is on the horizon only enhances the feeling of satisfaction when it arrives.
To prophecy means to reveal the spiritual meaning of things, and meaning is dependent upon the recognition of patterns.
By learning and practising the 'patterns' of the Spirit in our liturgical services, we develop a mindset that allows us to interpret events in our lives and in the world around us with prophetic wisdom.

Getting used to coming to Liturgy and other services does not lead to boredom, but to an awareness and appreciation of what it is that makes this _particular_ moment special.
Perhaps the saint or the feast resonates with us, or the choice of Scripture readings is especially applicable; or that, for some indefinable reason we find ourselves meditating on a particular truth, such as God's mercy or the sweetness of paradise.
Through these things, the Holy Spirit is in direct communication with us personally, revealing God's truth. This is the prophetic core of the Christian experience made possible through liturgical practice, and it is available to everyone.

In addition to this general gift of prophecy, some are called to exercise creative gifts, for example through architecture, words, icons, and music.
Everything that is made in the Church is not only beautiful, but also _apocalyptic_, or revelatory.
By giving our attention to the icons, hymns, and prayers, we open ourselves to hearing God speak prophetically through their human creators.

### Witness

> *If you have tasted that the Lord is gracious, then come to him, the living stone rejected by human beings but chosen, precious, in the sight of God. You too, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house, a holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. ...you are a chosen lineage, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people purchased to proclaim the virtues of him who called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.* (1 Peter 2:3-5,9)

It is important to understand that the Church is not something that we observe from the outside and benefit from, but a living entity that we participate in.
If spiritual artistry is inherently prophetic, then the greatest 'art' is the Church itself, with both divine and human authors.

To be baptised and sealed with the Holy Spirit is in itself a prophetic act where we summarise and reveal not only the totality of our own existence, but of all creation.
The 'new heaven and new earth' in the Revelation (21:1) are the counterpart of each of us who become a 'new creation' in Christ (2 Corinthians 5:17).
Each Christian is therefore a prophet, not by receiving special messages directly from God, but to the extent that he or she is able to demonstrate that the Kingdom of heaven has come in power (Mark 9:1) and that Jesus is Lord&mdash;and not only _our_ Lord, but the Lord of the cosmos.

It is tempting to see prophecy as either an enviable 'direct line' to heaven, or else as a kind of spiritual fortune-telling that has no place in Orthodox faith.
But with a deeper understanding, we can have the confidence to embrace the prophetic voice at the heart of the Apostolic Tradition, both as a spiritual gift given to certain individuals as well as a calling to all who are a part of the Church as faithful witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ.

[^saducee]: <https://www.britannica.com/topic/Sadducee>
