---
title: "Passover and the Promised Land"
date: 2023-10-29
categories: [Essays, Sunday Sessions]
tags:
---

<audio controls>
    <source src="/catechesis/assets/audio/20231029.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
</audio>
<p></p>

This week we will be continuing our Old Testament overview by looking at the defining moment of Israel's history, Passover, and it's fulfillment in Christ.

> *Then the Lord said, 'Indeed, I have seen the affliction of My people in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrow. So I came down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up from that land to a good and large land, to a land flowing with milk and honey ... But I know Pharaoh the king of Egypt will not let you go, not even by a mighty hand. Thus I will stretch out My hand and strike the Egyptians with all My wonders which I will work among them; and after that he will let you go.'* (Exodus 3:7-8,19-20)

With Abraham we saw the establishment of the covenant, and with the Exodus from Egypt we can begin to understand how that relationship works in practise.
If we can internalise the Passover motif, it will give us an important lens to understand the Crucifixion and the Resurrection of the Lord.
Here are some themes that stand out:

## The Oppression of Israel

> *God also spoke to Moses and said to him, 'I am the Lord. I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as their God, but I did not reveal to them My name, Lord. I also established My covenant with them to give them the land of the Canaanites, the land of their sojourn, in which they were strangers. I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I remembered My covenant. Therefore say to the children of Israel: "I am the Lord; I will bring you out from under the Egyptian tyranny; I will rescue you from their bondage and redeem you with an outstretched arm and great judgments. I will take you as My people and be your God. Then you shall know I am the Lord your God who brought you out from under the Egyptian tyranny."'* (Exodus 6:2-7)

The social justice movement has leveraged the Exodus story to campaign against slavery and racism, which is no bad thing.
However, we should see something a little bit more specific than God's love for all people, as important as that is.
The context here is God's promise to make Abraham's offspring a blessing to the whole world.
Pharoah, by contrast, wants to use the Israelites for his own glory and enrichment.
The moral of the story, then, is not about independence, but about whether human power can thwart the will of God.
Israel's goal is not unqualified freedom, but freedom to serve God, so that God in turn can fulfill the covenant through them.

## The Tyranny of Pharoah

> *Then Pharaoh said, 'Who is He, that I should obey His voice to let Israel go? I do not know the Lord, nor will I let Israel go.'* (Exodus 5:2)

We often think of tyranny and oppression as political problems, but Exodus encourages us to see their root in the spiritual realm.
The tyranny of Pharoah is the opposite of idolatry: if idolatry means to give to something else what should be given to God, then tyranny is to take it by force.
The end result of trying to own God's people is that he loses his own first-born.
This lesson is summarised by Christ when he says 'For those who want to save their life will lose it, but those who lose their life for my sake, and for the sake of the Gospel, will save it. For how will they benefit if they gain the whole world but lose their life? Indeed, what will they give in exchange for their life?' (Mark 8:35-37)

If we look in the parts of our own life where we are not recognising God or giving Him glory (and if we are honest, there probably are), then we will likely find there the same tyrannical impulse and 'hardening' of the heart (Exodus 4:21).
Oftentimes repentance means letting go of something that we shouldn't have been possessively holding onto in the first place.

There is also the sense in which we should identify the fallen world we live in with Egypt.
Even if we do not face political oppression, we are oppressed by the results of the fall and enslaved to our sinful passions.
This awareness should temper the utopian impulse that causes us to confuse the present life with the 'promised land' that we are moving towards.
We are all in need of deliverance.

## Passover

Israel's deliverance came with the death of the first-born of Egypt, but also with the killing and eating of the Passover lamb in each Israelite household.
The first was a tragedy, the second a sacrifice.
The Orthodox Study Bible gives a great summary of some of the symbolism here:

> *Through His saving work, Christ becomes our Passover (pascha in Greek). Through Him we experience liberation from sin, death, and the devil. St. Paul exclaims, "Christ, our Passover, was sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast” (1Co 5:7, 8). He is the Paschal Lamb (Is 53:7; Jn 1:29; Rev 5:6–14) who gave Himself up in sacrifice "once for all” (Heb 10:10–14) to reconcile us with God. At every Pascha&mdash;"Easter”&mdash;the Church sings:*

Here I will substitute the translation we use in our parish:

> *Today a sacred Pascha has been revealed to us; a Pascha new and holy, a Pascha mystical, a Pascha all-venerable, Pascha, the Redeemer Christ himself; a Pascha that is blameless, a Pascha that is great, a Pascha of believers, a Pascha that has opened for us the gates of Paradise, a Pascha that sanctifies believers all.* (Paschal Verses)

We can explore our connection to the Passover in more detail at some other time, for now it is enough to be aware of the connection to the Eucharist and to remember that every Divine Liturgy is a 'little Pascha', a celebration of our deliverance from spriritual bondage and an invitation to journey to the promised land.

## Crossing the Red Sea

The parting of the sea is another symbol of the two-sided reality of death.
For Israel it is a transition and a right of passage, while for the Egyptians it is destruction.
The symbolism of going into the water should remind us of Baptism, where we die (or escape) from the world in order to be reborn into freedom.
This is why Christ chastises Nicodemus the Pharisee for not understanding what it means to be born again. (John 3:3-5)

Christ Himself was baptised in order to fully identify with humanity and 'to fulfil all righteousness.' (Matthew 3:15)
In addition to being baptised by John, His death was another kind of Baptism, or more accurately, the reality which the practice of Baptism images.
The Paschal Canon for Holy Saturday explains this with an explicit reference to Exodus:

> *He, who with a sea-wave had buried the tyrant pursuer long ago, was buried beneath the earth by sons of those then delivered. Now, as once the maidens did, let us sing to the Lord, For He is greatly glorified.* (Ode 1)

In the same way as the passover sacrifice, again we are reminded by this that death is an unavoidable reality.
This is true whether we are talking about our physical mortality, or simply the impermanence of earthly things.
However, we can choose to experience our death salvifically in Baptism, or else destructively with Pharoah's army if we are grasping after the present life.

## The Wilderness

As if dying wasn't enough, the far side of the sea doesn't dump you into the land of milk and honey, but the empty desert.
If there was any doubt about whether or not this is a meaningful part of the spiritual journey, we only have to look at Christ's own 40 days spent in the wilderness.
From these two accounts we can see that the purpose of the desert is two-fold: first to be 'proved' by trials and temptations, and second to learn complete dependence on God in the absense of any alternative.
The contrast is that Christ overcomes these temptations, whereas the Israelites fell prey to a spirit of idolatry, grumbling, and distrust, so that most of them died in the wilderness.

Like the metaphor of Egypt, the wilderness is also a helpful description of our time on earth. We too are caught between faithfulness and faithlessness, and we are also in the process of being formed into the likeness of Christ as we endure trials.
It is out of this spirit the the Beatitudes start to make a lot of sense: 'Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven' (Matthew 5:3)
It's not that God hands out arbitrary rewards to those who meet certain criteria.
Rather, the trials of life bring out those characteristics&mdash;humility, meekness, mercy, purity, and peace&mdash;which allow us to enter the Kingdom of God.

The time in the wilderness reminds us of God's provision for His people during the journey. As Christians our 'manna' and our drink are Christ Himself. The following is from the Paschal Canon:

> *Come and let us drink a new drink, not one marvellously issuing from a barren rock, but one that Christ from the tomb pours out, incorruption's very source. For we are established in Him.* (Ode 3)

## The Promised Land

> *Faith is an assurance of things hoped for, a conviction about things not seen. People of old bore witness to this. ... They did not receive the promises, but they saw them from afar and embraced them, acknowledging that they were strangers and pilgrims upon the earth. Those who say such things are making it clear that they are looking for a homeland. Had they been thinking of the one from which they came, they had time enough to return, but now they yearn for a better one, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, or to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.* (Hebrews 11:1-2,13-16)

The title 'Promised Land' ties it to the promise, that is, the covenant with Abraham.
It is the end goal of journey, but more importantly it is the place where the relationship between God and humanity can (at least in theory) manifest itself fully.
Hence it is the Kingdom of God.
In reality, we know that the Old Testament history of Israel, and also the history of the New Testament Church, rarely lived up to its potential because of sin.
It is interesting that the Old Testament itself does not hide this fact&mdash; on the contrary, Israel's unfaithfulness is a central theme.
We could be discouraged by this, but the text rather uses the contrast to hightlight God's continuing, unconditional faithfulness.
Indeed, this faithfulness is what brings Jesus to the cross.

We can also make the faithfulness of God the backbone of our own faith journey.
When we 'miss the mark' (sin), we can always be sure that God has not abandoned us.
St Paul is probably quoting one of the earliest Christian hymns when he says,
'If we have died with him we shall also live with him. If we persevere, we shall also reign with him. If we disown him, he will also disown us. If we are faithless, he remains faithful. He cannot disown himself.' (2 Timothy 2:11-13)

The Kingdom of God, then, is not an object or a gift that we receive independently of the giver.
It is more like a marriage, an ongoing mutual relationship.
We should be constantly yearning for our heavenly homeland with the Psalmist:

> *How belov ed are Your dwellings, O Lord of hosts.*  
> *My soul longs and faints for the courts of the Lord;*  
> *My heart and my flesh greatly rejoice in the living God.*  
> *...*  
> *O God, our protector, behold,*  
> *And look upon the face of Your anointed.*  
> *...*  
> *For one day in Your courts is better than a thousand;*  
> *I chose to be an outcast in the house of my God,*  
> *Rather than to dwell in the tents of sinners.* (Psalm 3:10-11)

## Salvation in Christ

A Rabbi once summarised the spirit of Passover by saying that 'every single individual must see and look at himself as though he had been a slave in Egypt and as though he went forth to freedom.'[^personal]
In this traditional Jewish understanding we can clearly see the seed of the Christian understanding of personal salvation in Christ.
Let us make the Exodus story *our* story: leaving Egypt behind and enduring the wilderness, trusting the presence of God in our life, and keeping our hope fixed on the heavenly city.

[^personal]: Rabbi Yom Tov ben Avraham Ishbili, quoted from <https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/i-was-redeemed-from-egypt/>
