---
title: "The line of David"
date: 2023-11-05
categories: [Essays, Sunday Sessions]
tags:
---

## Kyrie

One of the most common titles we use when we refer to Jesus Christ is 'Lord'.
This title is often the used in the New Testament epistles. St Paul says, for example:
'Even though...in heaven and on earth there are many "gods" and many "lords", for us there is but one God, the Father: everything is from him and we exist for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ: everything is through him and we exist through him.' (1 Coninthians 8:5-6)
One can hardly spent even a few minutes in our services before hearing the repeated refrain, 'Lord, have mercy', and this is further echoed in our private devotions when we say the Jesus prayer.
The Anglican Bishop NT Wright gave a nice one-sentence summary emphasising how the Lordship of Christ is at the very heart of Christian faith: 'The gospel', he says, 'is the royal announcement that the crucified and risen Jesus, who died for our sins and rose again according to the Scriptures, has been enthroned as the true Lord of the world.'[^wright]

The concept of kings and lords was commonplace in the pre-modern world, not only in religion and politics, but even in the domestic sphere.
In an Orthodox wedding we still crown the couple as monarchs of their new home, and a large part of the success of their family will be detirmined by how well they are able to embody this role.
No matter the person or circumstance, in a traditional society any person can look 'upward' to find a point of reference, wether in the home, in the state, or in the church.
In each sphere, the lord is not a tyrant so long as he is both submitting to the Lord of Lords and imaging Christ's Lordship in his own limited way.

Once again we find ourselves at a disadvatage in the modern world with its faith in meritocracy.
For us, respect is only given when we deem that another person has earned it&mdash;that is, that we decide that they are performing adequately and meeting our expectations.
The recent slogans 'not my president'[^not-my-president] and 'not my king'[^not-my-king] are only the most visible manifestations of our egocentric view of reality.
We may not go to these extremes, but many of us are still guilty of rejecting God-given authority in our lives, and we may have to do some 'unlearning' before we can foster an Orthodox mindset.
We need God's own help to do this, as St Paul says 'no one is able to say, "Jesus is Lord" except by the Holy Spirit.' (1 Corintians 12:3)

Unfortunately, it is very easy to come into the Church while still being our own 'lord' for all intents and purposes.
The open forum of the internet, while it can be so helpful for inquirers, also amplfies the voices of self-proclaimed teachers who push their own agendas in the name of Orthodoxy.
As a general rule, if it is 'I' who have decided to join the Church because it suits my religious ideas, and if it is I who judge whether or not I and the people around me (and even the clergy) are 'doing it right', then for certain I haven't yet understood that Jesus is Lord.
If you think that your local Orthodox parish will be the place where your idealogies and preferences will be catered to, get ready to be severely disappointed.

Now that we've roughly sketched out the divide between a kind of generic traditional society and where we are today, we're now going to look back at the role of kings in the Old Testament, their fulfillment in Christ, and how we can begin to live this out in an Orthodox manner.

## The Judges

> *In those days there was no king in Israel. A man did what was right according to his own vision.* (Judges 21:25)

Between the time that the Israelites entered Canaan and the first Kings is the called the time of the judges, because when troubles appeared during this time, there was always a God-appointed 'judge' who was able to save the day.
As you go through the book of Judges, it becomes increasingly obvious that this is not a sustainable solution!
The sinfulness of the people and their consequent distance from God means that He needs to take an extra step to cross the divide in order to preserve the covenant.

## The Kings

> *Then all the men of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah, and said to him, '...establish a king for us to judge us like all the rest of the nations.'* (1 Kingdoms/1 Samuel 8:4)

The role of the King was given to Israel as a necessary concession to sin, and one that would often be painful.
And yet, paradoxically, it would also become one of the most powerful symbols used by God to reveal Himself.

We can clearly see in the story that coronation is always given rather than earned&dash;that is, it is an act of grace.
The actions of the king, even very bad ones, are never enough to disqualify him from his role.
This providence, however, is never a _carte blanche_ for the ruler's whims, but actually a terrifying responsibility that cannot be avoided.

## David and Christ

Of all of the kings of Israel, the one remembered most is King David, followed by his son, King Solomon.
Despite their well-documented mistakes, these two are especially remembered for embodying the purpose and role of kingship in a way that points towards Christ.
David in particular is called by God 'a man after My own heart, who will do all My will.' (Acts 13:22)
It is David as psalmist who clearly described Christ in the New Testament's most quoted psalm, 109 (110), 'The Lord said to my Lord, "Sit at My right hand, Until I make Your enemies the footstool of Your feet."'
St Peter says of David, 'Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh, He would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne, he, foreseeing this, spoke concerning the resurrection of the Christ.' (Acts 2:30-31)

It is important that we recognise Jesus as not only the Son of God and the son of man, but more specifically the Son of David with regard to his Kingship.
This is one of the confessions of faith St Luke gives us, coming paradoxically from a blind man who is nevertheless able to see Christ's true identity. (Luke 18:38-39)
St Paul picks up the theme when he introduces 'the gospel of God...concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh'. (Romans 1:1-3)
It is safe to say that in our theology, the importance of hereditary kingship is alive and strong.

It is in Christ's role as King and Lord that he is able to establish God's Kingdom 'on earth as it is in heaven', centred around the Church's Liturgy and emanating outwards.
The feast of the Ascension takes on special signifigance in this regard, as the moment when He sits down at the right hand of the Father, signifying the beginning of His divine rule, having conquered death by His resurrection.

## Where We Fit In

The Christian life begins with obedience, not only to Christ but also to the lesser, human authorities which are established in His providence.
We must follow St Paul's instruction to 'do everything, whatever it may be, as a labour of the soul, as if for the Lord and not for people, knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of an inheritance because it is the Lord Christ you are serving.' (Colossians 3:23-24)
This also means that a Christian should never take part in the kind of unrestrained, spiteful attacks on public officials which have become commonplace today.
Just as our obedience to human authority is iconically directed towards Christ, so to is our disrespect.

We should not believe, however, that our duty as Christians ends with submission.
Our job is rather to minister and mediate Christ's authority in our own roles of responsibility, as co-heirs of His inheritance.
Firstly and most importantly this applies to our own selves: we are all called to be self-governed and to re-establish the paradise of Eden in our own hearts by bridling our passions and resisting temptation.
But additionally, we may find ourselves providentially given additional areas of responsibility: in the home as parents, at work as supervisors, and in the church working in ordained or unordained ministry.
These are further opportunities for us to embody the Kingdom of God in our own time and place, something that should make us both thankful and sober.

Regardless of our station in life, we are all both servants and royalty in limited ways. Most importantly, we share in Christ's Kingly role as members of His body. St John gives us the apocalytic vision of this reality in Revelation 19:11-16:

> *Then I saw heaven opened. I saw a white horse, and sitting on it was one called Faithful and True, for with righteousness he judges and wages war. His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many jewelled headbands with names inscribed, and an inscribed name that no one but he knows. He is arrayed in a garment dipped in blood, and his name is the Word of God. The armies in heaven, clothed in fine linen of pure white, follow him on white horses, and from his mouth comes a sharp double-edged sword with which to strike the nations. He will rule them with a rod of iron, and he treads the wine vat of the fierce wrath of God, the Ruler of All. Inscribed on his garment and on his thigh he has the name King of kings and Lord of lords.*

[^wright]: <https://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2009/june/29.34.html>, accessible as a PDF at <http://www.christianitytoday.com/assets/15177.pdf>
[^not-my-president]: <https://www.theatlantic.com/photo/2016/11/not-my-president-thousands-march-in-protest/507248/>
[^not-my-king]: <https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-edinburgh-east-fife-66108871>
