---
title: "In the beginning: Truth in the age of information"
date: 2023-10-01
categories: [Essays, Sunday Sessions]
tags:
---

## Truth in the age of information

*In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.* (Genesis 1:1)

The beginning of the book of Genesis is, at least on the surface, a story about the beginning of the world.
But in reality it is much more than that.
Its purpose is to show us the spiritual principles by which the natural world and our own souls come into being, manifest goodness, and err into sin, through their relationship with God as Creator and Redeemer.
It is the story of the cosmos, but also the story of our own soul.

Many modern scientists, armed with facts and figures, are quick to scoff at a literal reading of the 7-day creation.
It may be that they are deliberately misunderstanding the text when they do this, or perhaps they are responding to those fundamentalists who do in fact insist on that literal reading.
But I think it is often the case that both the fundamentalist and the scientist are completely unaware of what it is that the first chapters of Genesis are actually trying to say.
The 'enlightenment' of the modern world has in fact reduced and impoverished our ability to understand what it means for something to be true in the first place.
The creation story speaks to the modern world as clearly as ever, and perhaps even more so: but we have lost the ability to listen.

A simple experiment can go a long way toward re-aligning our perception.
Imagine for a moment that you meet up with a friend or a family member and they ask the benign question, 'How was your day?'
What will you say?
First, you might pause to recollect.
And then, you will tell them a story.
If you are skilled, even the most ordinary, run-of-the-mill day will grab and hold your listener's attention.
The story will have foreground and background, setup and climax, characters and plot.
Most importantly, it will suggest how the listener should understand what happened--- what was surprising, who are the heroes and the villains, and so on.
If you are honest, it will be a true story.
But if your modern listener gives it the same treatment as Genesis 1-2, they might be skeptical.

Is that what *really* happened?

Perhaps you enjoyed a coffee with your breakfast, but of course we *really* know that what you call enjoyment is only a neuro-physiological response conditioned by a biological caffeine dependency and the comfort of a daily routine.
Calling it 'enjoyment' has missed out the facts entirely.
And even if we accept that the story does contain some actual facts, it is an extremely distorted account: some things have been overemphasised, while others have been omitted entirely.
If all that matters is 'the facts', then all facts---every countless minute detail of every split-second---matters equally.
Which is to say that, in the end, nothing matters at all.

This is thankfully (except in the case of autism) not how we perceive or act in everyday life.
We know that more facts and more detail don't always mean more truth.
In fact, the way that we present the story, by giving attention to some aspects while ignoring others, by describing things in a certain way, is precisely the way that we reveal and present the real meaning of things.
The truth is not either objective or subjective, but *relational.*

It is this more natural and 'everyday' kind of truth that we need to return to if we want to make any progress in faith.
We should be thankful for that: the path is narrow but straight, and straightforward.
It is critically important that we believe the Bible to be true---but we must let the stories themselves teach us what that means.
If we believe that Genesis 1-2 is true in the same way as the statement 'Today is Tuesday', we will likely end up tangled in some strange pseudo-scientific theories.
But more importantly, we'll miss the message that the story is trying to give us in the first place.

It is only in the relational that we can find God himself, not in either the rational or the scientific.
In his novel 'The Brothers Karamazov', the elder Zossima replies to a woman who asks him, 'How can I get back my faith? ... how is one to prove it?'
He says 'There’s no proving it, though you can be convinced of it. ... by the experience of active love. Strive to love your neighbor actively and indefatigably. In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul. If you attain to perfect self‐forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor, then you will believe without doubt, and no doubt can possibly enter your soul. This has been tried. This is certain.'[^zossima]

## The Way, the Truth, and the Life

*Everything came to be through him, and nothing that exists came into being without him.* (John 1:3)

*And now, Father, glorify me beside yourself with the glory I had at your side before the world came to be.* (John 17:5)

In the next session we will start to explore the principles or mechanisms of the creation story to see how they inform our own personal experience, and guide us to the Word and Truth, Jesus Christ.

'...because in him all things have been created: those in the heavens and those on earth, those which are visible and those which are invisible. Whether it be thrones or dominions or principalities or jurisdictions, everything is created through him and for him. 17 He himself is above all, and in him everything is held together.' (Colossians 1:16-17)

[^zossima]: The Brothers Karamazov, Book 2, Chapter 4.
